plus particulièrement, une tendance au sein de cette pratique vise à mettre en perspective les discours de l'innovation, perçus comme dominants 

les imaginaires du futur sont-ils soumis à la domination technologique ?

en tant que designer/practicien, la question qui se pose est la suivante : qui sont les practiciens, artistes, designers, qui remettent en cause la question de l'innovation, et construisent t-ils de nouveaux imaginaires du futur ? Cette pratique spéculative peut-elle être problématique ?

imaginaire collectif du futur

----

Speculative fiction provides an important opportunity to anticipate and prepare for techno-cultural change. The problem arises when we begin to prioritize that fictional narrative over actual experience, when we let these speculations control the reality that emerges.

au sein de courant émerge un mouvement critique de la Silicon Valley, qui semble détenir les imaginaires collectifs du futur

visions techno-utopique

This is the “innovator’s dilemma”: do you give your customers what they say they want, or what they do not yet know they need? 

 success in business comes from harnessing “virtues” like “culture,” “leadership,” “collaboration,” “creativity,” and of course, “innovation.”

What began as something spontaneous and unique has today become a parody of itself. What was exceptional and emergent in the realm of ideas has been bottled, packaged, and sold back to us over and over again. The whole TED vibe has come to resemble a sales pitch.

What’s infuriating is how Silicon Valley capitalism consistently attempts to sell itself as outside or even above corporatism. In announcing Facebook’s IPO, Mark Zuckerberg, whose company has consistently violated user privacy in the name of profit, stated that “we don’t build services to make money.” He actually said that.

At TED, “everyone is Steve Jobs” and every idea is treated like an iPad. The conferences have come to resemble religious meetings and the TED talks techno-spiritual sermons, pushing an evangelical, cultish attitude toward “the new ideas that will change the world.” Everything becomes “magical” and “inspirational.” In just the top-ten most-viewed TED talks, we get the messages of “inspiration,” “astonishment,” “insight,” “mathmagic” and the “thrilling potential of SixthSense technology”! The ideas most popular are those that pander to a metaphysical, magical portrayal of the role of technology in the world.

Can a new wave of technology thinkers produce a fresh outlet for smart ideas not (yet) co-opted as badly as TED? If so, it won’t come from the well-financed centers of Silicon Valley but from the margins, the actual cutting edge.

---

Steve Jobs’s techno-Utopianism evinced in the quote above is both clear and typical of the era. A million geeks worked with visions of beating high-tech swords into ploughshares, creating tools that would make life better and bring the world together. More subversively, computers and networks would restructure society, for the first time ever, in a truly meritocratic way.

----

Yet the vision of the future these would-be champions of tech-driven innovation offer turns out, on closer inspection, to be very cramped and fearful. Many of the companies emerging from Silicon Valley aren’t offering any magical new technologies but merely matching services like Taskrabbit, Airbnb, and Uber. These platforms are little more than mechanisms to more efficiently exploit precarious labor and circumvent local regulations covering work, housing, and transportation.

Take, for example, the 2014 “Luddite Awards” handed out by the Information Technology and Innovation Foundation, an industry-funded think tank. One group of supposed technology haters are the proponents of net neutrality, the principle that Internet communications should be available at the same prices and speeds to all users. Because this principle invalidates the business models of companies that would like to use their monopoly position to charge variable prices for network access, the net neutrality movement is deemed “anti-innovation.”

To be an opponent of the future, it seems, one need not be opposed to technology or innovation as such but merely to any use of it that happens to be profitable in present times.

But because the cycle of valorization can only be completed in the future, capitalists are necessarily obsessively focused on the nature of that future. This is where capitalism’s extreme future-orientation and extreme conservatism converge. For capitalist production is premised on the notion that the future is already known and has a definite form, where the markets and the demand for commodities exist to realize the surplus and pay off the debts. If the shape of that future were to radically change—if for example, net neutrality regulations undermine a tech startup’s business model—then fictitious capital never finds its material basis and it loses its value. The company goes under; the debt becomes worthless.

The Silicon Valley entrepreneurs, who are now our leading propagandists for the future, know this all too well. In their industry, the distinctive form of fictitious capital comes from firms providing “venture capital” (and the related “angel investors”). Like all fictitious capital, the money that comes from these investors is still in search of its basis, which it hopes to find in a promising startup. It is expected that many will fail, but that a few will pay off massively by becoming the next Facebook or Google.

The utopian future as a lucrative IPO is hardly inspiring. So we are regaled instead with tales of the magical gadgets and techno-fixes to social problems that we can expect in the future. But the only future the capitalist truly cares to protect is the one in which fictitious capital can continue to find its material basis.

**It is said that science-fiction futures are always really about the time in which they are written.** The same is true of all radical speculations about the future of capitalism, and all attempts to lay the groundwork for a different future. In a very specific, quantifiable sense, they call into question the value of assets in the present, and therefore the social power of the owners of those assets.

----

In the time of rapid technological development, hyper-production and aggressive social and psychological manipulations, the need for criticism and reflection is definitely more expressed than before. It seems to me that speculative approach is well suited to that new, “overclocked” reality because it is more extreme and it can go further on. It is braver in scrutinizing and creating objects, contexts, scenarios and policies, which provokes reactions before certain problems manifest. In my work, I am least focused on final products and concepts. For me, it is far more interesting to continuously examine and revise things, keep sketching, which allows for much more operations. Also, I have always been attracted to technology that is nowadays the main social driver but also an important source of inspiration and a very powerful tool for expression.

These practices are interested in radical examination (“tilting”) of the system with the intention to find mistakes or create new solutions in realistic or simulated/virtualized contexts. Results are often inapplicable at that given moment or tend to be excessively destructive because they point out to enormous failures and absurdity of the overall design and politics.

----
###Philip K Dick

So I ask, in my writing, What is real? Because unceasingly we are bombarded with pseudo-realities manufactured by very sophisticated people using very sophisticated electronic mechanisms. I do not distrust their motives; I distrust their power. They have a lot of it. And it is an astonishing power: that of creating whole universes, universes of the mind.

Of course, in science fiction no pretense is made that the worlds described are real. This is why we call it fiction. The reader is warned in advance not to believe what he is about to read.

The basic tool for the manipulation of reality is the manipulation of words. If you can control the meaning of words, you can control the people who must use the words. George Orwell made this clear in his novel 1984. But another way to control the minds of people is to control their perceptions. If you can get them to see the world as you do, they will think as you do. Comprehension follows perception.

We have fiction mimicking truth, and truth mimicking fiction. We have a dangerous overlap, a dangerous blur. And in all probability it is not deliberate. In fact, that is part of the problem. You cannot legislate an author into correctly labeling his product, like a can of pudding whose ingredients are listed on the label... you cannot compel him to declare what part is true and what isn’t if he himself does not know. 

----

> "With your permission, you give us more information about you, about your friends, and we can improve the quality of our searches. We don't need you to type at all. We know where you are. We know where you've been. We can more or less know what you're thinking about."
> Eric Schmidt, CEO of Google, 2010

> “Our strategy should be not only to confront empire, but to lay siege to it. To deprive it of oxygen. To shame it. To mock it. With our art, our music, our literature, our stubbornness, our joy, our brilliance, our sheer relentlessness – and our ability to tell our own stories. Stories that are different from the ones we’re being brainwashed to believe.
> Arundhati Roy, War Talk


----


> And I could say, if we had the time, (although you know it well enough) what Jesus, Isaiah, Mohammad, Spinoza, and Shakespeare told us. It is all the same: There  is no escaping from ourselves.  The  human dilemma  is as it has always been, and it is a  delusion to believe  that the  technological changes of our era  have  rendered irrelevant the  wisdom of the  ages and the sages.

> The first idea is that all technological change is a trade-off. I like to call it a Faustian bargain. Technology giveth and technology taketh away. This means that for every advantage a new technology offers, there is always  a  corresponding  disadvantage.  The  disadvantage  may  exceed  in  importance the  advantage,  or  the advantage  may  well be  worth the cost

Rejoins l'idée de Damasio sur le pouvoir vs la puissance : (GPS) --> on échange notre puissance d'orientation pour le pouvoir de se repérer

> Perhaps the best way I can express this idea is to say that the question, “What will a new technology do?” is no  more  important  than  the  question, “What  will  a  new  technology  undo?”. Indeed,  the  latter  question  is more  important, precisely  because  it  is  asked  so  infrequently.  One  might  say,  then,  that  a  sophisticated perspective on technological change includes one’s being skeptical of Utopian and Messianic visions drawn by those who have no sense of history or of the precarious balances on which culture depends.

> The questions, then, that are never far from the mind of a person who is knowledgeable about technological change  are  these:  Who  specifically benefits  from  the  development  of  a  new  technology?  Which  groups, what  type  of  person, what  kind  of  industry  will  be  favored?  And, of  course,  which  groups  of  people  will thereby be harmed? 

> Perhaps you are familiar with the old adage that says: To a man with a hammer, everything looks like a nail. We may extend that truism: To a person with a pencil, everything looks like a sentence. To a person with a TV camera, everything looks like an image. To a person with a computer, everything looks like data. I do not  think  we  need  to  take  these  aphorisms  literally.  But  what  they  call  to  our  attention  is that  every technology  has  a  prejudice.

concept de *Technolopoly*