Résumé de la discussion **SPECULATIVE NOW**

design spéculatif émerge dans les 60-70 avec les mouvements de designs et d'architectures radicaux (Archizoom)

La pratique "radicale" = des principes :
- resistance à la pratique *mainstream* et à la domination technologique
- se concentrer sur des sujets sociaux
- réinventer la profession de designers/architectes (autour d'un prisme politique)

Contexte très important ---> progrès technologique sans précédent
à l'époque, mettait au défi la pensée moderniste, aujourd'hui on retrouve cela avec les nouvelles formes de technologies

**confronter la technologie** comme idéologie dominante
mais le "nouveau design speculatif" **confronte aussi aussi les problèmes sociaux, écologiques, politiques...**

il semble que le design speculatif peut se transformer en une nouvelle forme de pratique 

> (EXPOSITION "design after design") 
 National Museum of Science and Technology Leonardo da Vinci / Cavallerizze
2 April – 12 September 2016

----

> Instead of being passive consumers, like I was and still mostly am, they were throwing away the users manual and tweaking technology in order to create thought-provoking, inventive, sometimes silly, often meaningful works. 

-> artistes nouveaux médias dans les années 80 qui **modifiaient légèrement** la technologie dans le but de créer des projets provoquants, inventif, parfois bêtes...etc

----

> The actors of speculative design are engaging in an interesting and critical way with technology and science (like artists do) but they are using a more explicit language, putting everything into a more recognisable framework, in everyday life, in society, in all kind of contexts. Their work engage with transport, furniture, new ways of dating, of consuming, etc. Everybody is familiar with that.

-> les designers spéculatifs, comme les artistes, s'intéressent à la technologie et à la science mais **utilisent un langage plus explicite**, facilement compréhensible pour le public, plongé dans la vie de tous les jours et dans des contextes reconnaissables. Tout le monde peut comprendre de quoi il s'agit car c'est un langage plus proche des gens, plus familier.

----

> We see a structural problem of speculative and critical design in that it always assumes technological evolution to be taken for granted. It presents its own reality as something we all will definitely encounter. It doesn’t take into account that technology is not accessible to everyone at the same level, even if you take in consideration something like mobile phone use, something very ubiquitous within the confines of the so-called Western World.

-> problème design spéculatif : provient du fait que les évolutions technologiques sont prises pour acquises, alors que les nouvelles technologies ne sont pas accessibles par tout le monde au même niveau (smartphone par exemple)

-----

> I think the ‘field’ emerged at a particular historical moment in education, where a group of people where trying to find a position that reacted against decades of formal, conservative, commercially orientated design education. So, they where trying to do some things that you were saying, they were trying to think about the social consequences of technology and to challenge the normative delineations of technological progression. It was trying to give a human voices to the social reality of technological hype.

-> le design spéculatif arrive EN REACTION à quelque chose
-> essaye de réfléchir aux conséquences sociales du progrès technologique, de "donner une voix humaine" à la réalité sociale de l'innovation

----

> It allows people to think in a way that you could not do before. I mean we do not need to have complicated workshops; we don’t need to have expensive materials in order for that thinking to happen. Today, we were using card post-it notes, markers and more importantly our imagination.

-> l'imagination = le premier outil de pensée spéculative

----

> A lot of people talk about speculative design being all about dystopias - a kind of glossy dark version of the future world. Of course a lot of projects do present such imaginaries - they are the ones the press like to publish because they are dramatic and provocative but speculative design can also show positive potential futures and I think that is what Mo’s project did for me. If we can explore various futures and describe alternative approaches to the one that we are following at the moment, why not try and make them happen? And that for me is the most positive outcome of a project.

-> le design spéculatif, ce n'est pas que des dystopies, ou des scénarios dramatiques
-> c'est aussi des futurs possibles optimistes, qui peuvent donner l'envie de les concrétiser (spéculation = purement théorique)
-> **design spéculatif (deux termes qui s'opposent ? design = fonction / spéculatif = qui ne vise aucune application pratique)**, qui se nourrissent!
-> utopie vs dystopie ? non, on est dans le spéculatif, donc dans le domaine du possible, pas du "meilleur" ou du "pire"

----

> One of the things I have seen, and maybe one of the drivers behind the popularisation of a critical speculative approach to design, is that ‘the market’ has become hungrier for ideas about technological futures. Large corporations have amassed huge wealth and therefore spend time and money speculating about where technology will go. People who are equipped with certain skills in imagining those trajectories become quickly consumed into very different job market, whether that’s in think-tanks or advertising agencies, they’re employed to produce imagery and ideas about the future. 

-> un des leviers de la popularisation de l'approche du design spéculatif, c'est que "le marché"" est affamé d'idées autour des futurs technologiques. **Les entreprises, de plus en plus puissantes, dépensent du temps et de l'argent à spéculer sur l'avenir de la technologie.** Il y a un marché autour de la création d'imaginaires et d'idées à propos du futur.

----

> As I said early on, speculative design is still evolving and I think it’s probably likely to split as things settle down. Different approaches are emerging, different reasons for doing it are emerging, and probably 20 years from now we will have some sense of all of this. It might be dead, who knows. But for now I think it is critical that we have such discussions to move things forward, to improve, to challenge, to understand. It is also important to refine our ways of questioning and challenging how things are because I see the world becoming increasingly problematic in many ways and (mainstream) design operates in the middle of that problematic part.

-> au sein de ce courant, **différentes approches** émergent (d'où les différents noms), et **différentes raisons** de faire du design spéculatif émergent
-> le design traditionnel (ou *mainstream*) a sa part de responsabilité dans les problèmes de la société, et le design spéculatif peut permettre d'influencer la pratique du design

___

#CRITIQUES du DESIGN CRITIQUE

>It’s long, so we’ll try to keep it short. I would start by saying there is a lot of criticism at the speculative design approach that completely dismisses it. What differentiates what we have been doing is that we are actually trying to use speculative design as a way of interrogating these very problems that we see in what speculative design sets itself to do. We do not see it as a thing for which you can say — it does not function for anything but rather — what does it function for if we change the terms, not just the content of what it does. Our criticism started as more of a very immediate look at the lack of representation, the lack of non-white bodies, the depiction of women and people of colour in subservient roles. Another thing that stood out a lot to us was the normativity depicted in social relationships. The world is changing, and these debates are so immediate now. Speculative design is not addressing this. It addresses futures in which social structures are still the same, and very conservative.

problèmes de représentations (personnes non blanches, femmes...)

>For us, as subjects coming from a very different social, political, and historical background, we also saw a complete lack of self-identification with the projects. We see a structural problem of speculative and critical design in that it always assumes technological evolution to be taken for granted. It presents its own reality as something we all will definitely encounter. It doesn’t take into account that technology is not accessible to everyone at the same level, even if you take in consideration something like mobile phone use, something very ubiquitous within the confines of the so-called Western World. I’m not talking about other countries in south Asia, or West Africa, but rather where we come from – Latin America, Brazil, the most "developed", or "developing", country in Latin America. It’s still a country of such profound social inequalities which technological development is not able to address. We fail to see many of the things we know from our own histories being addressed in what speculative design is doing. And that’s where we started–we started probing into different ways of doing it.

LP: The thing is that we’re not so focused on technology itself. We’re more interested in the social structures that make this technology possible, or the world that this technology inhabits. The problem is, as we see it, when you focus on the technology in speculative design, and fail to address the politics of it. You fail to address these underlying politics that surround these things. And we see it as a problem when these reflections are not an actual part of the project. Because something that tends to happen, that for instance Cameron Tonkinwise has already called out, is that frequently when a project like this is called out on its problematic views, on its problematic stance then all of a sudden the response is to say — it was actually a question, not an affirmation. A good example of this could be for instance the building the border wall project that has been circulated a while ago. They had an open call for people to send proposals for building a border wall Trump wants to build, between Mexico and the US, and all of a sudden when the organiser was criticized, then it turned into a question, they literally just added a question mark at the end. But the problem is… when you have a problematic thing like this, putting it as a question doesn’t change the fact that this is a racist project, a xenophobic project, it toys with things that are very serious.

PO: I think the border wall is an interesting example, because it was later marketed as something that meant to use the "absurdity" of asking designers to build the border wall for "igniting debate". So they added a question mark, and Building the Border wall became Building the Border Wall? Doing so does not necessarily turn this into a "critical project". If you understand the border wall to be a technology in itself, then you start to see how this creates other layers of interpretation that you can probe into and start asking — Ok, but what exactly should be criticized? — isn’t it the very existence of a wall, or the social structures that makes this wall be though of in the first place, the very idea that makes us build walls? This project does not address these questions just by adding a question mark or even by asking people to develop those propositions for those walls. I think that an important thing to highlight is that the lack in design education of an engagement with sociology, political science, anthropology, things that actually constitute the design profession as such, and the impact designed things have in the world. So when critical design becomes the "political branch" of design, it exempts the rest of the design profession of its own political accountability. It assumes that critical design is what design has to do to be political, and not assuming that designed things are political, period. Or that the design profession is political, period. 

> Ask yourself “does my dystopia happen already in other ‘invisible’ (sic) places of the World?” It is good to know if what would be terrible for you and your audience isn’t already reality for others. Before asking “what if…?” ask “is there…?”.

---

EN REPONSE A CA

 I cannot help but wonder if your critique should really be focused on mainstream design because essentially we are fighting the same battle and there is probably an awful lot of agreement on many of the points. You said that critical design is the philosophical of branch of mainstream design… and that suggests that they are complimentary, that they are the part of the same family - with that I really disagree because as I said on the design myths slide (design is good, design improves people’s lives, design solves problems) there are huge problems with the design industry. Speculative and critical design provides a way of critiquing this industry - it is in affect its enemy or a counter to it.

Secondly there is this issue of where design happens - the ways we develop and apply technology in the West (and the role of design in that process). This is hugely problematic, in particular the notion that technological progress is unquestioned.

This is the context I am familiar with, so it makes sense that my focus is here. Automation, for example, is going be hugely problematic in the years to come, driverless cars destroying communities; robots coming into our homes doing things for us at all times. The potential implications of this raises huge philosophical questions: this is primarily a Western problem at this time and of course it affects everybody ultimately. I do not know too much about Brazil or other countries that have different power structures or different approaches to technology. I would be probably be critiqued for being imperialistic if I went there and started imposing my views… so it is a kind of lose-lose situation. What I do feel is that the questions, the critique and the examinations (made by speculative design) are valid and could be disseminated and used elsewhere. Because it is just a way of exploring and examining the world using design, through design and trying to think of how things might be otherwise. 
